# Let's Not Call It Remote Work

COVID-19 brought one positive change to the world at least: people realized that most of their work can, in fact, be done outside of the office.  As case counts decline and vaccination rates tick up, companies (especially the big ones) are fighting this tooth and nail, but the experiment is over, and remote work -- or, if you prefer, working from home -- came out on top.

Still, I'd like to find another name for it.

Words are important.  Language matters.  They are the constructs through which we view, refine, and distill our chaotic inner thoughts into communicable ideas, and share those ideas with others.  The monikers "remote work" and "working from home" are both problematic.  Both are built on the intrinsic assumption that work happens at the office, and everywhere else is in need of some qualifier.

Don't believe me?  Consider the penny-farthering bicycle.  That's the old-timey one where the front wheel is comically larger than the rear wheel because "gears" hadn't been invented yet.

(That's a gross over-exagerration of the situation.  You know; I know it -- let's just move on.)

It's *called* the penny-farthing bicycle because the two wheels look like a penny (a large coin) next to a farthing (a much smaller coin).  These were dangerous vehicles, it being quite easy to fall off the bicycle in the frontwards direction.  When bicycles with two equally-sized wheels hit the scene, they were marketed as "safety bicycles" because they were, well, safer.

We don't call them that any more, of course.  Because we don't have to differentiate them.  A bicycle is a bicycle, and that weird thing with the amusingly large front wheel now has a name that differentiates it -- as the outlier.

## Work

Calling what you do when you don't drive to a room all day to sit with other people who have driven to the same area to sit in the same room for the same amount of time "remote work" casts it as the outsider; the oddball; the strange one.  The modifier "remote" implicitly shows off this bias - it's work, but it's done somewhere else.  It's remote.

"Working from home" is at its heart a temporary solution.  Just as one would "work from the beach" or "eat on the couch" -- these are not the normal venues for performing those tasks, hence the "from X" tacked onto the end.  We need to stop that, if we ever want to escape the tyranny of the office.

"Local work" is fraught with other connotations (think: "buy local"), but perhaps we could go with something simpler.

Like "work"

It's work.  Whether you do it from a branch office, headquarters, or the data center where the servers are co-located, it's all work.  A lot of people like offices; they either need to get away from their families / spouses / significant others, or they need the change in scenery to actually be able to focus.  Whatever their reasons, office work is fine.

Maybe we just call it that.  Office work.
